Hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about malloc in C.
Firstly malloc stands for memory allocation.
so memory can be allocated in two ways
statically or dynamically. In static allocation, memory is allocated at
compile time in stack.
But in dynamic memory allocation, memory gets allocated at run
time in heap.
Both stack and heap sections are stored in random access
memory of the computer system
We often use declaration statements like int a, char c,
float number  etc.
All these comes under static allocation whereas using malloc
calloc etc.
comes under dynamic memory allocation
Now the question is, why do we need dynamic memory
allocation? It is because there will be many cases where
we don't know exactly how much memory we are going
to use.
If we allocate the memory initially maybe it will not
be sufficient or it may get wasted.
So in such cases we can use dynamic memory allocation
which is very efficient because here whenever memory is needed
it is allocated in runtime
So to dynamically allocate memory we have two inbuilt functions
malloc and calloc which are declared in
Standard Library
file stdlib.h
So to use these functions in our programme we must
include stdlib.h first. Now let us see
an example programme
Where we first declare an integer pointer ptr and it
is a static memory  allocation
So memory is allocated in Stack and let's assume memory
for ptr is allocated at address 2048
Next we have a dynamic memory allocation statement which uses
malloc function and malloc function actually takes one argument
which is the size of memory
needed in bytes and it returns the base address
of the memory allocated, that is if we have
malloc(10), 10 bytes of memory will get
allocated in heap and return its base address
So here in this programme we have malloc(5) x sizeof(int)
It actually means we need memory for five integers
So when translating size of int = four so
5 x 4 we get 20 bytes which is what
we need
So 20 bytes of memory is allocated in heap and
assume at address 1000 and by default this allocated memory
will be filled with garbage values and its base address
1000 is returned which will be stored in ptr
So that is why we need a pointer here
Using ptr, we can access the allocated memory
Next we have some assignment statements
First *(ptr+0)= 10
So as we discussed in the previous tutorial
*(ptr+0) is the value at first integer slot
so 10 will be stored here
Next we have *(ptr+1)= 20
So at second slot 20 will be stored and similarly
30 40 and 50 also gets stored in here
Now let us consider a scenario where the heap is already
full and using malloc we're trying to allocate some
memory but heap is full already
So what happens is malloc returns NULL instead of
the base address
So whenever we use malloc we should first check
whether memory was really allocated or not
So for that we can perform a NULL check like
this
That is if value returned by malloc is NULL, memory was
not allocated
otherwise it was successful.
So that's all and thank you for watching this video